---
title: Quitting Meat
tags: science
description: "In this article, I debate the antics of quitting meat."
featured: false
featuredImage: snap1101.webp
featuredImageColor: "#9b694f"
---

In this opinion piece, I debate the antics about quitting meat.

# Against Meat
## Digestion
It is harder for the body to break down and digest meat. Having eaten plant food for so long has adapted my stomach and intestines to light foods. The food metabolizes and breaks down with ease and I remain light during the day. When you aren't a frequent meat eater, meat makes you feel sluggish.

## Superiority
The simple idea of killing animals for food is wrong, because that is the intended path of survival in nature. However, killing animals with superior intellect, arguably higher conscience, and understanding of complex emotions, like Cows and Squid is arguably bad. This can be one feel guilty because that is 'murder'. This is a complex debate to have, and puts many off from eating meat.

## Factory Farming
Factory farming is a method of raising animals for food in intensive confinement, with the primary goal of maximizing profits. It has become the dominant system of animal agriculture in many parts of the world, but it is also one of the most controversial and morally problematic practices in the food industry.

In the Kurzgesagt video "Why Meat is the Best Worst Thing in the World," the negative impacts of factory farming are thoroughly explored. One of the main problems is the immense suffering that animals endure in these systems. They are often confined in cramped and unsanitary conditions, denied access to natural light and fresh air, and subjected to painful procedures like dehorning and castration without anesthesia.

Furthermore, factory farming has a devastating impact on the environment. It requires massive amounts of water and feed to sustain, and produces enormous amounts of waste and greenhouse gas emissions. The use of antibiotics in factory farms also contributes to the rise of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, which poses a serious threat to public health.

Despite these issues, factory farming persists because it is a profitable business. The demand for cheap meat means that producers are incentivized to prioritize efficiency over animal welfare and environmental sustainability. However, as consumers become more aware of the problems associated with factory farming, there is a growing movement towards more sustainable and ethical forms of animal agriculture, such as free-range and organic farming.

## Efficiency
At the top of a food web, there is the Sun connected to Plants, to Herbivores and Carnivores. The higher-up your source of food in this chain, the more resource efficient it is. A civilization of higher intelligence and understanding of their role in harbouring life in the universe would be eating more plants. Due to the upcoming plight of the climate catastrophe, humanity have to look for ways of cutting their carbon emissions. To cut 25% of total global carbon emissions, we could either cut all fuel-based travel like Airplanes, Cars and Trains or stop eating Cow, Pig and Goat. Shockingly, both these choices (All carbon-emitting vehicles and in the world V.S. Cows, Pigs, and Goats as food) pollute a similar amount of Carbon Dioxide and Methane. The decision is clear, certain things just can’t be taken down as they are inadmissible to the growth of our species. It would be like returning to the Middle Ages. 

# For Meat
## Nutrition
A vegan diet may not provide adequate nutrition for a physically active lifestyle, as key nutrients are lacking in plant-based foods. Vitamin B12, D3, Calcium, and Omega 3 are lacking in a purely vegan diet, and are linked to meat and dairy products.

## History
The consumption of meat has a long history in human civilization, and the lack of evidence for completely vegan cultures may suggest that it is a natural part of the human diet. Even today, meat consumption is still an integral part of many cultures around the world. While there may be examples of vegetarian or vegan cultures throughout history, it is worth noting that these were often limited to specific religious or philosophical groups rather than widespread practices. Furthermore, in many cases, these cultures relied on animal products like dairy and eggs for necessary nutrients. For example, in India, where vegetarianism is widespread, the traditional diet includes a significant amount of dairy products. Additionally, meat consumption has been linked to cultural identity and social status in many societies, making it an important part of many traditions and celebrations.


# Conclusion
I have made up my mind that I will not be a regular meat eater. I won't eat red meat. But I do plan to continue eating meat occasionally. I would certainly be more thoughtful and careful with my choice of place serving meat as health is the only real concern for me, like preventing acne outbreaks, digestion problems and plant-based nutrition for better health. Otherwise, I live a relatively environmentally healthy life and I need not guilt-trip myself.

Apart from philosophical reasons for quitting meat, I can only consider stepping down to vegetarianism. Vegans are essentially vegetarians with celiac disease or lactose intolerance or both. Simply because a complete nutritious diet cannot be achieved with just fruits and vegetables. 

If one's thoughts towards animal cruelty and global warming outweigh their liking for dairy products, do they venture into the realm of veganism and have supplements and plant-based alternatives to foods that are deficient in a vegan diet. That is, and should remain a highly personal choice.

When it comes to the environmental impact of eating meat, it is important to note that apart from cow and pig meat, other meat products produce minimal dairy as compared to other sources of greenhouse emissions. For instance, the International Livestock Research Institute estimates that livestock accounts for only 14.5% of the world’s total greenhouse gas emissions. This means that other sources of emissions such as transportation, energy production, and industrial processes, are responsible for the majority of global warming. 

Therefore, reducing meat consumption may not be as effective in curbing global warming as cutting down on emissions from other sources. Moreover, as meat is an important part of many cultures and diets, it can be difficult to get people to cut back on their consumption. 

Nevertheless, there are still ways to reduce meat consumption in today’s world. People can start by eating less red meat and replacing it with other sources of protein such as fish, nuts, and legumes. People can also choose to eat organic and free-range meats, which are typically produced in a more sustainable manner.