---
title: Consumerism
tags: ["philosophy","self-improvement"]
description: "Don't give into the trap of consumerism."
featured: false
featuredImage: consumer.webp
featuredImageColor: "#ffcd01"
---

> This is a waking call, not only to tell you to write, sing, act, dance - dive into creative expression because you should strike a balance, but because there is a profound satisfaction that comes from creation, more than anything consumption could offer.

Consumerism has become a defining feature of modern life. We live in an era of unprecedented access to goods and services, and we are constantly bombarded with messages telling us to buy the latest and greatest products. 

Modern human success built on capitalism has lead to cities, where at every sight, there are business trying to sell us something. As a result, consumerism has become an integral part of our culture, influencing how we think and act.

Consumerism is driven by the need for material possessions, but it also has a social aspect. We often buy products as a way to show off our status or to create an image of ourselves that we find desirable. This kind of consumerism can lead to excessive spending and debt, as well as feelings of insecurity and inadequacy.

Modern consumerism can be linked back to Dopamine based mechanisms like immediate gratification. It can cause people to become focused on the immediate reward of a purchase instead of considering the long-term consequences, overestimate the value of goods, and become dependent on the pleasure associated with shopping. As a result, it can lead to overspending and financial hardship.

At the same time, consumerism has the potential to be an empowering force. The availability of goods and services has made it possible for people to express themselves in creative and unique ways. Shopping is no longer just about buying what you need – it is also about creating an identity and cultivating a lifestyle that is meaningful to you.

Still, there is a need for balance. Creative expression is essential for our mental and emotional wellbeing. It allows us to explore our inner selves, discover new perspectives, and express our thoughts and feelings. Creative activities can also help us foster meaningful relationships, build community, and develop a sense of purpose.

Early in my journey learning and applying various soft skills, building my character and embarking on projects, I realized that content creation is a must-have feather in one’s cap. The entire workflow in expressing your thoughts is conducive to growth. I was influenced by Dr. Jordan Peterson's words on the importance to be able to structure thoughts and how basal the need for development in this skill is. Hence, I wanted to become a writer, and here we are! I write opinion pieces and essays fairly regularly but don’t always publish them. 

A little more matured version of me chiming in, I enjoy writing on my own, and letting my original and organic thoughts blossom into content pieces which others can also enjoy, rather than writing with the purpose of digital content creation.