---
title: Why Windows over Linux
tags: ["OS", "Linux"]
description: "Why do I use Windows personally after being a Linux user for years? Perhaps, the grass isn't greener on the other side."
featured: true
featuredImage: windows.webp
featuredImageColor: "#294172"
---

*The grass isn't greener on the other side. The following is an essay on Linux and Windows, and why I chose Windows after being a linux user for over three years.*

I am an experienced Linux user and a fan of open-source software. I've used everything from Debian, Arch, Fedora, and their mainstream derivative distros. Mostly I had maintained a dual-boot system, but at times, daily drove Linux as my main and only OS. I am enthusiastic about security and privacy and passionate about Linux. I occasionally read news of the latest developments in Wayland, Gnome, KDE and the Kernel. With all that said, I've been a Windows user for the longest as I can as remember using Computers, and will continue to be one primarily. Here is why.

## The Windows Experience isn't bad
I have never felt that Windows was a buggy and messy OS. There are plenty of examples of that online, but I have not experienced such. Over time, I've mastered how to maintain a Windows installation perfectly, and have always had a stable experience with the OS.

I've learned security etiquette to identify malicious software, PUPs, adware, and can steer clear of them while keeping my installation clean and secure without the need for a third-party antivirus running active scans all the time. System apps don't crash on me. Big picture, you can fully utilise Microsoft's vast array of well-made first-party apps and an even bigger platform of power-user apps.

You just have to learn once how to deal with Windows's annoyances. I enjoy using and fiddling with Linux, but I would want to use my main PC instead of tinkering with it in my spare time and move on with my personal life.

## Installation and Setup
*Objectively, I do not find Windows inferior in the process of installation and setup of software. Let's dissect my statement.*

First let's go over drivers. The *point* of using Windows is preferring the proprietary software and drivers that are available over open source drivers on Linux. You used to download drivers for system components separately, but try installing windows today, most things are automatically downloaded from Windows Update.  It works. You can still get your component drivers from your device vendor, and check for updates occasionally for the latest updates. It works.

Now, on Linux, most people don't have to think about drivers *at all*. That is absolutely amazing. There is not much comparison on this point between the two unless you have some specific requirement. My point being __both of them work__.

When it comes to apps, both systems are equal.

On Linux, the cherished terminal is touted as a fast and straightforward way to install apps. I am a hardcore terminal user and don't shy away from it at all. However, on Windows, installing apps is better than people like to believe, and how it is perceived online.

The Windows Store, Winget Package Manager and it's slew of GUI wrappers, and simply searching for apps on Google or Bing gives you access to an equal or greater set of apps to install, and they work *reliably*.

Use Adblock when navigating the web to avoid scam websites and web elements, and verify downloads if seem suspicious. Use common sense and it's a highly functional system. On Linux, although it is nice to open your terminal and install popular apps in one command, it is not always that simple, with version, availability, and permission issues.

The problem with Linux is needless redundancy. There are a lot of disparities in package managers and packaging formats, and one can easily run into version and availability issues. Having to package apps for an increasing list of distros is incredibly wasteful. The various app standards are repetitive and confusing for new users. In my experience, the correct way to navigate this web of standards to install apps is to use system-wide dependencies for most things and Flatpak for certain apps, but not everyone is clear about this, and at times, I *do* stumble across tar.gz, Snaps and AppImage as the only available formats for apps that may be non-negotiable for me. 

Even [Mr. Torvalds commented](https://youtu.be/Pzl1B7nB9Kc?t=78) on this, application writers have one target binary to compile for on Windows - amd64 (others being 32bit and arm but they're a minority today). The problem with linux is fragmentation, 20 distros, many package managers and target formats.

You can just not care about these issues and install whatever you want, that leads to another issue, "dependency hell". So, it is not a perfect solution. What matters is _getting used to either workflow._

Jumping in here, using system packages (.deb/rpms) and sticking to Flatpak has been largely successful for most people including me, but there are those 10% of times where you have to look for a workaround.

## The App Inequality
The inequality of apps present on either platform is narrowing, but there. I think Open-Source alternatives to all software is not the answer, and that **pure** libre distros and software is not completely a good idea for competitiveness.

To be clear, I am not blaming anyone on the Linux side or making this their problem. It’s not, but still, there is a clear reason to prefer Windows — using the best tools for the job — Microsoft Office, Adobe Suite, countless other professional apps, and thousands of games.

These days, even for those involved in *privateering*, running apps on Linux works pretty well. Usually, all those guides, cracks, and activators exist for Windows. Giving it up and looking to alternative open-source programs doesn’t cut it. This might the biggest reason for me to stay on the Windows platform.

## Performance
I'd like to also dive into GPU based workflows. Thanks to Valve and the community, gaming is better than ever. Today, with the exception of anti-cheat, games run just as good or better on Linux.

While AMD supports it's upscaling FidelityFX, and basically all of it's features on Linux, Nvidia users who want to use all the latest features their expensive cards support, should sit out on Linux for now. The data shows that there is not a noticeable performance difference between the OS's, and nor am I personally interested in getting some more FPS, but it's the stark inequality of effort by the company here. The thing is, games are playable, but the gaming culture is missing.

The importance of the gaming culture of trying out random games, and effortlessly hopping onto a match with your friends is only felt when you can't do it. 

For most applications, performance is an increase on Linux - file transfer, Idle resource use and general execution is great.

*Jumping in later, Nvidia released a driver that plays well with wayland and is going to open-source kernel modules. Cool!*

## Appearance
The UI of Windows 11 is simply incredible. The 2022 updates have smashed it out of the park. Paired with a decent machine, it works well, and looks great. I am proud to also say that the Linux DE's have caught up. Gnome 4x and KDE 5.x are freaking amazing today. I am happy to say that they are comparable to Windows, so picking one is an individual preference.

## Knowledge and Culture
I don't mind being the Tech Support person in my circle. I like problem-solving, digging into the OS I'm using and openly welcome interesting tech hurdles that others face.

My expertise in technology goes beyond my knowledge and journey; I am proud to play an active part in the Tech Cohort of our times.

With that said, I would say that I am an advanced user and easily fit into any talks about Linux in the general Tech Community. Knowing the depths of your OS is always a nice CS lesson, for Windows and Linux alike. There is no lack of culture in the Linux community, it’s vast, grand and pretty fun to read on. So, it’s a tie here.

## Virtualisation
Running Linux on Windows is much easier than the other way around. Microsoft has created an expansive ecosystem that runs Linux and Android software on Windows in a hassle-free way. WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) is a mature project and is suitable for the development and testing of Linux. It provides the most seamless integration between the two operating systems. If I were to daily drive Linux, I would not be comfortable to use virtualized Windows for a handful of apps, at least with my current hardware. If I had a balling PC, things would could be different. It still wouldn't make sense with a laptop.

For some time, the problems, inconveniences, and disruptions regarding dual boot didn’t concern me much. Maybe, I just didn’t have much real then work. Anyway, what is expected from the Tech workflow of regular high schoolers? *Now, I need to use one OS.* Dual booting is just a pain.

## Productivity
People prefer Linux purely for the Tiling WMs. Once you grok how to use one, you are truly powerful.

I had dual monitors before I entered college. I still don't find tiling useful. Multiple workspaces are amazing, but Windows supports that too!

I have one screen. I maximise everything and use multiple workspaces. Simple.

## Privacy
The 'achilles heel' of user privacy is not the OS. It is the browser. 

You can switch to Linux all you want, but as long as you use Google, Microsoft and other 'Big Tech' products (most people have to use for work), switching to an entirely separate OS is inefficient and maybe naive.

Windows certainly phones home, bountifully harvests user data, but that can be *[ahem](https://github.com/farag2/Sophia-Script-for-Windows)* [stopped](https://www.oo-software.com/en/shutup10).

If you can commit to entirely turning your digital life around with self-hosted apps, alternative services, go ahead.

Think about it, are you going to give up apps, workflows, years of knownness over privacy, which isnt going to stop anyways? Please don't go down the privacy paranoia / anxiety rabbit-hole. It never ends.

## Faster
If you have a low-spec machine, spend 50 bucks for an SSD.

Windows doesn't dent a decent CPU with even a SATA SSD. Bottom line, a low-spec and/or secondary device that is singular purpose like set & forget, would be perfect for Linux.

You can certainly optimise your windows install - background apps and services.
## Learning
If you want to learn about CS, ditch Windows, run Linux for a year and figure everything out. Do all your assignments, try to run different programs and script. It will help. Beyond that point, expect gains to level off.

Using Linux leads to horizontal / peripheral growth in knowledge, example scripting, system architecture and an overall deeper idea of software.

I believe you'd be better served diving into books and actual resources. Go in depth vertically. Doing both rocks.

## Miscellaneous
- No widespread adoption of Secure Boot on Linux. (This is Microsoft's fault)
- Nvidia driver support on non-Ubuntu based distros including the signing of kernel modules, Nouveau, systemd-boot and tons of kernel panics.
- Fedora kernel issues <a href="https://www.reddit.com/r/Fedora/comments/vg06mf/the_crazy_story_of_fedora_and_its_kernel">outlined in this Reddit post.</a>
- Ricing being a waste of time.

It doesn’t affect my conscience using Windows. I thought about it, and I don't really care. It is good having opinionated software. Just my thoughts.

## My Opinion on Other Takes
Reading other views for this debate online, I often disagree with arguments blaming the Linux community or developers for its flaws. I think this approach is unfair and misleading.

As a member of the Linux community, I have a vested interest in seeing open-source projects grow and become better. However, I am not biased towards Linux to the point of condemning Microsoft or other companies that seek to undermine Linux users. Open-source software is developed without any monetary gain, and therefore, there is no need for anyone to push their understanding of Linux on others.

Users have the freedom to choose whether or not they want to use Linux or join the community, and no one should impose their preferences on them. While I encourage people to contribute to the Linux community, I don't want to hinder their improvements or sound egocentric.

Still, it's unfair to blame them for any drawbacks of Linux distributions compared to their competitors. I think that it's acceptable to criticize Linux, but it should not be directed at the people behind it, given that Linux is entirely free.

I prefer to take a neutral position that appreciates the people working on these projects and their dedication to creating something amazing. In everything I do, I want to be respectful of everyone's passion pushing these projects.

## Why use Linux?
I’ve spent a ton of my time on Linux and have made a realization. I was thinking about why should one use Linux? What is the reason behind picking one distro over the other? Apart from the obvious reasons, it is the philosophy.

You prefer Linux over Windows because in every essence of it’s design, it assumes that the user knows what they are doing, and that in the default state of the OS, the user should have complete control over their system. 

You pick one distro over the other not because it has ‘Gnome’ and the has ‘XFCE’, Linux systems are the most versatile and modular, so you pick one over the other because you agree more with it’s philosophy regarding installation of apps, or how bleeding-edge it’s update cycle is, and so. That is the only thing that is truly different, and truly matters. Everything else is a matter of picking the *most convenient ‘starting-point’* for how you want to configure a system to your liking.

It is understood that Linux is ‘there’ in terms of readiness for _personal use_. I have just realized that given my use case, I’d rather use Windows than be on the other side for this purpose. Linux is better on servers and IoT devices, and I’d happily use Linux there. Linux is also meant to be great for development, which is true mostly because it’s most convenient on Linux, but I have many great tools on Windows as well. I am curious about computer software and design and Linux is a fantastic bastion of learning, and I will always hang on to that.

## The Conclusion
So, because the underlying philosophy of Windows doesn’t bug me, and that I enjoy the benefits of staying on Windows, I use Windows 11 these days.
