---
title: Consumerism and why you should write
tags: ["philosophy","self-improvement"]
description: "Don't give into the trap of consumerism."
featured: false
featuredImage: consumer.webp
featuredImageColor: "#ffcd01"
---

### Gumption Trap

Noun.

A human-created situation that drains away initiative or original effort. From gumption (spunk; resourcefulness; sensible initiative) + trap (a trick or contrivance for catching and holding people or animals).

*Example*

1. Your constant objections are turning this meeting into a gumption trap.

2. Don't ask Linda to get involved with anything that has to get done right away; the woman is a walking gumption trap.

.                                        . . .                                        .

Consumerism has become a defining feature of modern life. We live in an era of unprecedented access to goods and services, and we are constantly bombarded with messages telling us to buy the latest and greatest products. As a result, consumerism has become an integral part of our culture, influencing how we think and act.

Consumerism is driven by the need for material possessions, but it also has a social aspect. We often buy products as a way to show off our status or to create an image of ourselves that we find desirable. This kind of consumerism can lead to excessive spending and debt, as well as feelings of insecurity and inadequacy.

Consumerism can be linked back to Dopamine based mechanisms like immediate gratification. It can cause people to become focused on the immediate reward of a purchase instead of considering the long-term consequences, overestimate the value of goods, and become dependent on the pleasure associated with shopping. As a result, it can lead to overspending and financial hardship.

Apart from mindless and empty consumerism, another trap of consumerism is the hijacking of our time. In this attention economy that we live in, billion dollar corporations build gadgets that shoot straight into the back of our brain-stem, and utilise user behaviour and powerful psychological tricks (our primitive brain) to mess with dopamine-reward and attention cycles simply for profit. We must break the loop. Choose to live in the real world.

In today’s world, it is more important than ever to recognize the value of creative expression. We must be mindful of how consumerism is affecting our lives and strive to cultivate a balanced lifestyle that includes both consumption and creative expression. Only then will we be able to live lives that are truly meaningful and fulfilling.

A personal example I can share in cutting endless consumerism is when I stopped liking and showing interest in a decent amount of mainstream technology. I used to watch LTT and other channels on Tech very, very frequently. Now, I focus on their educational content. Society in today's world is into a new high of consumerism and it is imperative we stop and look back.

Early in my journey learning and applying various soft skills, building my character and embarking on projects, I realized that content creation is a must-have feather in one’s cap. The entire workflow in expressing your thoughts is conducive to growth. I was influenced by Dr. Jordan Peterson's words on the importance to be able to structure thoughts and how basal the need for development in this skill is. Hence, I wanted to become a writer, and here we are! I write opinion pieces and essays fairly regularly but don’t always publish them. 

So, reader! Consider channelising your voice and opinions, try writing!